A **symmetric algorithm** uses the **same key** in both the **encryption** and **decryption** processes.  
The decryption process is a **mirror image** of the encryption process.
- The two communicating parties need to **share knowledge of the same key**.
- A person without the correct key cannot read the encrypted message.
### Challenges
- If two parties think a communication path is compromised, they should not share key material along that path.
- Someone who has compromised communications between the parties could intercept the key.
- **Key distribution** is difficult because the key cannot be sent in the same channel as the encrypted message.
- Sending the key through a different channel than the encrypted message is called **out-of-band key distribution**.
- Examples of out-of-band key distribution include sending the key by:
    - courier
    - fax
    - phone
- Any party with knowledge of the key can **access and change** the message.
- Each person or group that wants to communicate needs a different key for each individual or group they want to connect with.
- This creates a **scalability** challenge because the number of needed keys grows quickly as the number of users or groups increases.
- In this arrangement, an organization of **1,000 employees** would need to manage **499,500 keys** if every employee wanted to communicate confidentially with every other employee.
### Primary Uses of Symmetric Algorithms
- Encrypting **bulk data** (e.g., backups, hard drives, portable media)
- Encrypting messages traveling through **communication channels** (e.g., IPsec, TLS)
- Streaming **large-scale, time-sensitive data** (e.g., audio/video materials, gaming)
### Other Names for Symmetric Algorithms
- Same key
- Single key
- Shared key
- Secret key
- Session key
### Symmetric Encryption via Decoding Ring
- An example of symmetric encryption is a **substitution cipher**.
- It involves substituting letters for other letters, or bits for other bits, based on a **cryptovariable**.   
- These ciphers replace each letter of the **plaintext** with another letter that may be farther down the alphabet.